doc/dev/cephadm: scalability notes (#38505)
ceph/ceph: doc/dev/cephadm/scalability-notes.rst

cephadm enhacements.

*******
 Intro
*******

Current situation:

Cephadm manages all registered hosts. This means that it periodically
scrapes data from each host to identify changes on the host like:

-  disk added/removed
-  daemon added/removed
-  host network/firewall etc has changed

Currently, cephadm scrapes each host (up to 10 in parallel) every 6
minutes, unless a refresh is forced manually.

Refreshes for disks (ceph-volume), daemons (podman/docker), etc, happen
in sequence.

With the cephadm exporter, we have now reduced the time to scan hosts
considerably, but the question remains:

Is the cephadm-exporter sufficient to solve all future scalability
issues?

***********************************************
 Considerations of cephadm-exporter's REST API
***********************************************

The cephadm-exporter uses HTTP to serve an endpoint to the hosts
metadata. We MIGHT encounter some issues with this approach, which need
to be mitigated at some point.

-  With the cephadm-exporter we use SSH and HTTP to connect to each
   host. Having two distinct transport layers feels odd, and we might

>    want to consider reducing it to only a single protocol.

Reviewer: big :-1: for multiple protocols .. 
* yet another port in the firewall to open
* handling of any security vulnerabilities for either ssh or http
* will likely require https (yet another cert to manage)
* etc..

Author: agreed. Otoh, I also don't like to use SSH for all sorts of things. Especially if we have a daemon already running on a machine, talking with it over SSH is a bit strange.

> -  The current approach of delivering ``bin/cephadm`` to the host doesn't

Reviewer 2: Totally agree!

   allow the use of external dependencies. This means that we're stuck
   with the built-in HTTP server lib, which isn't great for providing a
   good developer experience. ``bin/cephadm`` needs to be packaged and
   distributed (one way or the other) for us to make use of a better
   http server library.

************************
 MON's config-key store
************************

After the ``mgr/cephadm`` queried metadata from each host, cephadm stores
the data within the mon's k-v store.

If each host would be allowed to write their own metadata to the store,
``mgr/cephadm`` would no longer be required to gather the data.

Some questions arise:

-  ``mgr/cephadm`` now needs to query data from the config-key store,
   instead of relying on cached data.

-  cephadm knows three different types of data: (1) Data that is
   critical and needs to be stored in the config-key store. (2) Data
   that can be keept in memeory only. (3) Data that can be stored in
   Ceph Pool. How can we apply this idea to those different types of

>    data.

Reviewer 2: For storing  hosts data i think that we should use mon's k-v store only for a small set of host attributes. basically, the ones that are going allow us to contact with the host and to know what was the last time we had the contact.
Rest of information should be stored in memory. This means to have a quick way to retrieve the data. With the cephadm exporter we can reach probably several hundred of hosts in less than 1 second, so in my view the only thing we need to do is to improve cache refresh and cephadm exporter in order to have different intervals to refresh each type of information... for example:
daemons running in the host each second, disks each 10 minutes.

Reviewer: frequent updates to the mon store would likely not be a good idea. There is a potential for the updates from these client(s) to occur at a rater that is faster than the mons are able to persist/coordinate (via PAXOS) ... 

@jecluis correct?

Author: to some degree, we have to have the data outside of RADOS, as we're deploying the OSDs  in the first place. And cephadm needs to continue to work without any OSDs running. which means, all data that is required to decide any daemon deployments needs to be part of something independent of RADOS

>    that can be keept in memeory only. (3) Data that can be stored in
>    Ceph Pool. How can we apply this idea to those different types of
>    data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   that can be kept in memory only. (3) Data that can be stored in
   RADOS pool. How can we apply this idea to those different types of
   data.
```

*******************************
 Increase the worker pool size
*******************************

``mgr/cephadm`` is currently able to scrape 10 nodes at the same time.

The scrape of a individual host takes the same amount of time persists.
We'd just reduce the overall execution time.

> At best we can reach O(hosts) + O(daemons).

Reviewer: make this configurable?

but even if we were to increase number of hosts at a certain point we will become bound on the mgr given there is a single instance doing the coordination ...

Author: right. a possibility would be to switch from a pull architecture to a push architecture. this would enable us to do near-realtime updates of changes.

*************************
 Backwards compatibility
*************************

> Any changes need to be backwards compatible or completely isolated from
> any existing functionality. There are running cephadm clusters out there
> that require an upgrad path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any changes need to be backwards compatible or completely isolated from
any existing functionality. There are running cephadm clusters out there
that require an upgrade path.
```

if these changes are isolated, would this would imply a `cephadm:v2` and require proper versioning?
